hi everyone and welcome to past science
existential hope podcast and today we
have a very very special guest that I
think as yeah incredibly deal to the
project community and it's not other
than David George I think we're just
really you know been like yeah trying to
get you on for this uh onto this podcast
for the long because I think you know
there's a few people that I think I just
really associated with existential hope
one of them you know of course being
under Sandberg who we've also had on uh
now now previously but I think really
the and like the North Star almost like
the statue hope as you you wrote a few
really fantastic uh books including
fabric of reality which is now uh you
know a little older but has aged
certainly incredibly well and that's
really on a multiplicity of universals
and like how uh kind of that theory
combined with Evolution computation and
knowledge and Quantum places can really
like explain a new worldview and then
you publish beginning opportunity which
really was a big deal uh so people out
there in this community and you really
kind of like providing be antithesis to
the kind of like Doom to the modern
movie and meme when you're really saying
that no look progress doesn't have to
come to an end in fact we're really just
at the beginning
um and there's a few kind of like really
um pretty concrete ways in which we can
um push progress forward uh and and and
and also like a few more like abstract
and I think really good mimetic pieces
in which in how we can think really
about progress so this was a really
really great book and especially chapter
nine on optimism has really just stuck
with me I think if anyone you know reads
anything really like that I think gets
the kernel of existential hope across a
chapter nine and beginning of infinity
um and then obviously you haven't
stopped there I think another talk that
is very dear to my heart is um why are
flowers beautiful uh that is given it's
on YouTube and uh it's a real treat
um and then finally you're also the
creator of one of my favorite child Rays
philosophies I do not yet have kids but
when I do they will be raised under
shaking children seriously which is your
the child brain philosophy that you and
a few other really wonderful mindset
um you know have like have have have put
forward and we also have Chiara maletto
as a senior fellow who um wrote a really
wonderful book on the constructive
theory
um which you both are advancing and so
we're really excited to uh to have you
on so thanks a lot for coming online
um I know I said a lot about your um
kind of like
uh your contributions as uh looked as
looked at from a far side lens already
but if you would like to kind of like
summarize uh your perspective on like
how you got to where you are right now
um and yeah like your Life Path and a
little bit so that people can get a bit
of an as an understanding what makes you
you that would be absolutely wonderful
um I've never aimed for any kind of
Global Effect that way and and some of
the things that I
uh have been interested in have been
obviously related some of them have
turned out to be related to each other
and some not and I don't think one can
um or should
um direct one's
um research or one's life for that
matter towards a distant
all-encompassing goal because that means
that um
that if you're wrong
uh you won't find out until you're dead
and uh the the all all problems are
parochial and if they have Universal
consequences that's a bonus
uh we we can be on the lookout for
Universal consequences just as we're on
the lookout for all interesting
consequences
but
um the the main thing is to solve the
problems as they come up so I'll just
give you an example of that you know I I
was interested in quantum computers I
was interested in a theory of
computation more generally and
um uh interesting how that relates to
thinking
and much later decades later
uh came the uh ideas of of an AI
apocalypse
now it turns out
that these other ideas that I had
stemming from a completely different
context make the AI apocalypse
um
look
what's the word I can use I mean they
are absurd uh it if if for a start if
one regards an AGI and a a something
with human-like intelligence but running
as a program on a computer if one
realizes that that obeys the same
epistemological laws as humans do
then uh it doesn't make sense to apply
different
um
laws of society to it and especially it
doesn't make sense to enslave it
um namely causing
AGI alignment by force or building it in
into the hardware as it were not that
that would be possible but the the
attempt to do that is an attempted
enslavement
so uh that's not going to turn out well
and I I wouldn't I wouldn't have guessed
when when investigating the relevant
ideas initially that it would have any
such consequences
um and I mean I saw you tweet about this
a little while ago
um and do you find your ideas having any
like foothold or you know having any
airflow coming in the AI Community I
know that like well like um would you
like people to do is concrete specific
things differently based on these
observations like is there a particular
strand you know that you want to point
people to work
um well there are various things
involved here now I I think that that AI
uh recently for example GPT and chat GPT
uh is a wonderful thing and and uh can
be very useful
um and it has nothing whatever to do
with AGI in fact as I've written it's
it's more or less the exact opposite of
AGI
um because it involves
um honing the program
to conform more and more precisely and
in a shorter and shorter time
to meeting a given Criterion
whereas an AGI the difficulty and and no
one yet knows how to overcome this
difficulty the the difficulty is to is
to write a program such that
no possible for such that there is no
possible idea
um for which one can say it will never
enter that state it will never have that
idea
now people with immediately say well how
do you know it won't get the idea to
murder us well that's that's the thing
that's the that's the
um problem that has beset humankind
since we have existed and that's the
problem that was solved with liberalism
and the Enlightenment and now we know
how to do it we know how to
um
uh bring people up in a society that
makes it extremely unlikely that they
will become enemies of civilization
we haven't got it um
perfect yet
but uh we we've got it uh working
amazingly well from the perspective of
History
from the perspective of history that the
fact that that
um we have so few Wars so little
violence as Stephen Pinker likes to
point out is is unprecedented
and uh it's not inevitable it's it it uh
it's not that this had to happen
and it's not that it has to continue
it's just that we have the knowledge
both theoretical and institutional
to keep it going as it has been for for
hundreds of years
shall we say and if we continue
improving it piecemeal and so on as Carl
poppa would have us do
then there is no known reason why it
should stop but but it's not inevitable
it will all depend on what we choose to
do
so um if you were I guess like in in in
a bit more concrete juice in the let's
say AI alignment communities would you
advocate for like a taking children
seriously you for AI like taking AI
seriously view of it actually bring them
up in a specific way or yes uh I mean in
general the the history of educational
theory since the enlightenment has been
one of increasing freedom
for children and increasing integration
of the of the values of society in
general with those of educational
practices and institutions so uh that
that has come together and it
educational institutions are kind of the
last
the last institutions of of Western
Society
to take on board liberalism and the
indictment and and uh things are taken
for granted in in schools and
universities which if translated to
Society at large would seem absurd like
like valuing obedience and and and so on
and uh in in enforcing
um ritual behaviors and that kind of
thing but
this is today better than it has ever
been
it is still improving
uh and I I think that if uh AGI were
invented tomorrow
it would indeed be the right thing to do
to educate the newly
programmed AGI
uh as closely as possible in the way
that our society educates children I
mean I think I know of improvements upon
that but I I yeah I think it would be
wrong to enforce uh my narrow view of of
uh how to do things on everybody but
for everybody to uh to conform to the
standards of society at Large
is not impossible
and to do it for an AGI is not
impossible either
so you would almost be arguing for like
I guess more freedom in the way that we
educate AI is looking to um compared to
perhaps like what the general uh like
canon in the AI safety communities well
I don't Advocate this for AIS
for AIS I'm happy for them to be
enslaved and to and to be forced to do
whatever we want them to do as
accurately as possible in fact there is
a
there is a whole field of making sure
they do this and so that self-driving
cars don't run over people and that that
kind of thing and that's all fine and
the more accurately that is done the
better
but that is not how you get people to be
members of a free Society
that's that you have to do in some sense
the opposite and and we have
uh we have learned
slowly and painfully over the centuries
and to do some very
counter-intuitive things to makes and to
make those to entrench those as
fundamental principles of the of the
legal system and and of the financial
system and so on and everything
um so that so that we have uh policing
by consent
okay you know 500 years ago nobody could
possibly have understood what that
phrase means
uh government by the people
nobody would have understood that either
they you know if you've said it to them
they would have been imagined some
monstrous system which couldn't possibly
have worked
so
um but but
Society evolved uh through conjecture
and criticism and and cultural Evolution
to make these things work and to for
them to become second nature
um to throw them away
in regard to AGI is terribly dangerous I
mean it is the very danger that the AGI
alarmists are afraid of and and they
want to do the opposite of what's
necessary
yeah we wrote a little bit about you
know extending Frameworks of voluntary
cooperation towards artificial entities
and I think it you know would be
interesting to actually see
um you know how those could look like in
practice so basically like many of the
institutions that we currently use to
cooperate through in a relatively
contentual manner
um compared to the story as you said
um it's an interesting I think
theoretical exercise it was like you
know think about what those would look
like in AI context um
yeah very cool but obviously you know uh
you know you don't only have thoughts on
AI you clearly have like an incredibly I
think you know like yeah an incredible
breadth of
um of at least like being being able to
synthesize different deals and and I
think like you know Finding finding
really I think um sensible parallels
between them so um could you for like a
young Outsider like a young talented uh
person like entering your space uh would
you be able to give like a rough bird's
eye view I was like what it is that you
know you're working on thinking about
um so that you know they can maybe get
up to speed a little and then quicker
and I know that you actually said that
you don't like giving advice because it
doesn't have to be advice it's just this
one your individual standpoint and how
would you you know categorize your view
yeah so I also said that that giving
advice is not a good relationship to
have with somebody
um I I think
um
entering
so getting up to speed is also a little
bit misleading because although there is
in all the interesting in all the things
I'm interested in that there is quite
sophisticated knowledge which if if you
if you are indifferent to it let me use
careful words if you're indifferent to
it you will waste your time or you are
likely to waste your time or something
like that
um but not being indifferent to it
doesn't mean getting up to speeds there
is no such thing as speed uh I think a
better metaphor is the one used by my
old boss John Wheeler uh when when he
said that in physics
but he said in physics but I think it's
true of everything he said in physics
every point is a growth point
so wherever you look everything even if
something is is
um is uh has been known for centuries or
something has been just invented today
uh either of those things can be a point
of growth where where somebody says why
should it be like that what would happen
if it wasn't like that
and then of course most such
conjectures are wrong but they are the
means by which progress is made so I I
would I would if I were
starting out now as as indeed I suppose
I am
uh everybody is
um then I would I would want to
think about the interesting things and
think about what might be wrong what
seems wrong
uh what does what I don't get and and
too many people think that if they find
something they don't get it must be
because there's something wrong with
them
that's not true if you if you find
something that you don't get there's
almost certainly something wrong with
something else it's either with the
people who've told you about it well you
know the the the authors of the books or
the teachers of the courses or whatever
or there is something wrong with the
actual material
and and even if the material is
literally true
they may be looking at it the wrong way
and your perplexity may be and in some
sense must be
uh the fact that you're looking at it in
a
way that wasn't intended
and which has some
potential for improving it
I guess that is again uh you know rather
um I can compare it uh which uh which is
which is a nice I think um you know way
to even look at your own updating within
with initials
um all right so as someone
perhaps like you know uh entering you
feel you know still you know they they
may want to know you know Rafi or like
probably from your own perspective like
have you realized any like specific
culture ship that were like relatively
instrumental uh in your life that could
either have been like you know
throughout your academic career
um we're just like you know the general
um kind of like Canon with a new field
and shifted or uh on a personal level
you know when were things where you have
significantly updated for example and
were there any specific moments uh that
really got you a good future update your
world view was it relatively stable over
time
um well I think my world view
um has only been like largely shaken or
shaped once and that is when when I got
to understand popper
um uh but it has been
course corrected
uh several times and I I suppose the the
best known one of those is where is when
I uh decided to update
um turing's work on the universal
computer in the Universal turing machine
to include quantum mechanics and that
was after I had realized that
Turing had made tacit assumptions in his
analysis about physics and did these
tacit assumptions were false and what's
more that these tacit assumptions were
now being used in things like complexity
Theory to derive what they thought were
mathematical theorems but were in fact
consequences of the wrong Theory of
physics
so they they got the wrong answers for I
mean I only realized that that later but
it turned out that as a result of making
uh classical assumptions
um they got the wrong answers for things
like uh what computational tasks are
easy and what are difficult
yeah and I think you were actually
relatively successful at like
um you know going out there and
um you know at least they're correcting
that that error like at least like you
know providing providing alternatives
for that so that's a that's a great I
think um you know embodiment of proper
falsification he uh co-founded the or
founded the philosophy department at uh
the lse that I was in and uh so it was
like proper up and down and where at
least lost the education and certainly
has uh yeah have a have a deep
appreciation and nevertheless I think I
only gradually you become to understand
the very I think critical role that he
actually plays in everyday lives
um or over time so I think yes it's
interesting you understand something
theoretically and then over time in
reducing them as you get to New lives
that was very much the case for me too I
mean that when I when I first got
enthusiastic about popper
uh my my impression of what Popper's
theory was
was very wrong I mean I I I would now
not regard myself at that time as being
a popperian at all because I I'd
misunderstood most of the things uh what
I had understood though
um
just not to put myself down too much
what I had understood was that the
conventional way of looking at
epistemology and knowledge was just
wrong
uh completely wrong
um and what I didn't understand is just
how accurately and powerfully
um Papa superseded it
and you know I mean that popper often we
get to talk about also in context with
uh Hayek as you know to really like
proponents of the open society and I
wonder if you have any you know because
I don't think at least in my previous
research I've seen you very very much
talk about Hayek at all so I wonder if
you have any ideas
um you know if you're influenced by him
at all if it was mostly proper from the
scientific lens or it's highly from this
more well yeah
yes I I
think I've only ever read one book by
Hayek the road to surfton
uh and it was all right I mean it didn't
I I didn't find anything in there that
that I kind of didn't already think
um must be true
something like that
um Hayek is uh basically a right winger
um so in regard to economics I agree
with him uh in regard to uh Society at
Large
I I don't always agree with him uh and
papa likewise I think
um
uh I think he overlapped a lot with
Hayek but there were places where they
disagreed and uh where they where they
disagreed popper was usually right
except that
uh he was
to his dying day I think he was a
leftist and and Hayek was a rightist but
but that that only affects their ideas
in terms of the the
the color and tender of their ideas not
so much particular policies which I
think um in Papa's case he wasn't that
interesting even but poppers and high X
meta
take on political philosophy were much
closer
than the political policies that they
actually advocated
and that's much more important it's much
more important to get to uh to get right
how one thinks that that errors should
be corrected how one thinks what role
one thinks that institutions should have
and that kind of things much more
important than the actual policies that
those institutions adopt as any one time
because if they can be corrected then
you can hope that they will be corrected
but if they can't then you can't
yeah yeah I guess that should they said
that Hayek had very or like more
concrete ideas about how those that
should shape or influence Society
um you know here he he's just to be
corrected
um and okay wonderful
um well that was just uh to kind of
satisfy my own curiosity you know but um
I think uh you know I another question I
had is like how those you know what what
if any relationship there is between
taking children seriously and you know
the uh you know more I guess scientific
work that you've done you know like what
what what what prompted you you know to
uh to to go out there and like really I
think see this really wonderful movement
that I mean obviously I think in
high-tech education it's it's just
incredibly valuable and that's like you
know how we will shape the future and on
a pretty personal sense but was there
any bark there
I I don't think that there is at present
and perhaps there never can be such a
thing as a science of Education I I
don't think education Theory or even
educational psychology
has the potential to be a science even
in the future so it's all philosophy and
uh for me uh taking children seriously
is
simply the application of papyrian
epistemology
and more broadly liberalism
to the the
foundations of education and it it has
in a way so it's rather paradoxical
because in a way that means it's not
much of a change
since since liberalism is the kind of
dominant assumption in our society all
together and if you know you it's it's
completely normal to appeal to things
like freedom of speech and individualism
and and so on in in society at large
people may disagree with particular
cases but they won't say
that's not a way to argue you know we we
don't care about about individual choice
or anything like that so but on the
other hand as I said because of
well this is something we haven't
mentioned but because of meme theory
because of the way that memes work
um there is a
um
strong tendency for anti-rational means
to particularly manifest themselves in
education
just like
[Music]
um
if you can accept this analogy it's just
like in biology
the parts of our genome that are most
resistant to change
are the ones that determine the
structure and function of ribosomes and
generally of the DNA code
so the DNA code has been almost
unchanged
for three billion years
um
it has undergone slight changes you know
different different species have
slightly different ribosomes and
um animals and bacteria have slightly
different genetic code and so on but it
takes hundreds of millions of years for
that to change and that's because
the selection pressure
on this thing that is involved in
replication
is is stronger than for anything else
so in regard to human ideas or memes
that's the education system or the
education education practices now
this is not the Council of Despair I
mean memes are not genes and we are not
victims of them and we can choose we can
always choose to behave differently and
we can always use argument to decide
instead of instead of uh dark feelings
that one gets when one one does the
unconventional thing
uh so we can it's it it's just that it's
it's no accident I think that that
education is is the
part of society that has been slowest in
adopting the values of the enlightened
okay really really interesting
um thank you I also had I guess like um
question on the chapter on hope that he
wrote in beginning of infinity
um I think it's you know like the
chapter on optimism is I think one of
the ones that you know just really
brings the point home
um you know just really wonderful way
because I think one thing that you often
get um like that suddenly like I think
you know an existential hope lens on the
world of nurse gets it's like well isn't
this just pollyanish and you know you're
like entirely ignoring the word and it
just almost seems like you know you're
fighting like an uphill battle there but
just making a claim that like you know
there's they're good reasons for
optimism so I wonder if you you know
could uh lay a few out here
um you know obviously you can't
summarize the entire chapter and people
should definitely go read it if they
feel sometime but you know what are a
few uh you know good business options so
maybe maybe
the first thing to say is is not good
reasons for optimism but almost like the
one thing I
have in common
with the doomsayers
which is that I don't think anything is
inevitable
um human Improvement is not inevitable
it is uh always down to the choices that
people make and there is no limit
there's no uh naturally imposed
god-given limit on the size of errors
that we can make we can mess it all up
if we make the wrong choices
so
um yeah and as and that conditions
um that conditions
um how one
can become optimistic or how one can
have an optimistic world view
um while being
um while being able to combat the the
um
objections that you mentioned that you
run into
so it uh optimism is not what I call
blind optimism it's it's not the the
theory that things will go right even
though they look as though they will go
wrong
uh it it just like blind pessimism is is
the idea that things will go wrong even
if they look good
which also is quite a popular View
um it is that
um because
um what will happen
depends on our choices it depends on the
knowledge we will choose to create
and on the knowledge that we will not
choose to create
and on the ignorance that we will not
leave ourselves in
because of that
um there's no
reason
to give up on any problem
so problems are soluble their problems
are inevitable as I have also said to to
carve in stone and also to carve in
stone that they are that they are
soluble and they are soluble by by
specific
not methods because there are no methods
for problem solving but specific types
of process
can lead to solving problems and
specific types of process can inhibit
the solving of problems so uh conjecture
and criticism and uh institutions of
criticism and error correction and of
consent
um
are necessary
they are the
things that are most precious
in
maintaining our forward momentum in
regard to ideas because if they
are impaired it impairs everything
and once everything is impaired well
civilization has collapsed before
and uh I I see no sign of our
civilization collapsing but as I said uh
not there's nothing
there's no uh Supernatural Force holding
it up and enforcing continued progress
it'll be up to us and if if uh everyone
decides that progress is in fact bad
that progress is in fact an illusion
that progress is always at the expense
of one group of people in favor of
another if if that becomes a prevailing
view then progress will stop because
nobody wants it
and uh once it stops there's again
there's no reason why it should start up
again again historically it it stopped
and it started up again and in in these
uh smaller scale cases that I describe
in the book like Athens and and Florence
and so on
um
it didn't start up again it it uh it it
was just
um taken on board by the general
enlightenment
um but uh
I don't know of any law of nature that
says that the enlightenment had to
happen
um I think we should be very grateful
that it did happen and we should try to
keep it going and we should try to
improve it because it it uh it still is
very flawed it always will be always
will be very flawed we will never reach
a non-flawed or almost non-flawed state
but is it then um that you think that
perhaps the biggest risk that we're
facing right now in Civilization is more
like the
kind of distractions of those
institutions of uh you know really
project your criticism and consensus
that it took us so long to build
um because we got maybe distracted by
like you know some other things that we
think are actually higher risk and that
the solutions that we try to put forth
are actually destroying the uh
I'm not convinced that either is at risk
or all the risks of
proposed the risk proposed by the
doomsayers are are in fact very great I
mean
because they're so important it's worth
taking them seriously but I don't think
the actual risk is very great in in
either sense what we can say is what I
can say is that
whenever
our institutions are impaired
by some fad or fantasy or or bad idea
that's that's going around it is bad
people are suffering as a result of of
every time
institutions and traditions of criticism
and consent are impaired people get hurt
and people die of it
um this is from the point of view of a
civilization as a whole I I don't think
it's anywhere near that
that level of harm but you know every
every
every child that gets dragged to school
against his will
is a
um
impairment of the growth of knowledge of
civilization
and who knows what has been destroyed
thereby
yeah that's uh that's beautifully said
um all right well thanks John I will be
handing it over to battery uh for now
whereas a lot more and I get back to
hope for good questions but yeah I'll
just you know and definitely you have I
think you really have changed uh you
know the ways that like really like
people in this community the world and
like really wonderful ways and I think
it really also shows and how people show
up to each other and interact with each
other uh in the way that I think
oftentimes we are able to hold down you
know critical conversations uh within
plus that at least well to be well and I
think um you know if you don't get
reminded of these you know reasons for
Hawaii that's so important I've once in
a while and it's a bit harder to do so I
really thanks a lot for um for being so
uh well spoken and for I think really
living
um in a really wonderful way and there
are the types of things that you believe
in at least um
good to hear thank you
yeah
um thank you
um yeah so I I think
um I'm gonna ask you more about the sort
of existential hope related questions
but I was also curious to hear just
um there's this sort of idea that's
talked about a lot now from like I know
Toby order and the precipice like
um we're in this very crucial time in
history where we sort of
um what we do now has like an
unprecedented opportunity of shaping
what the future in the really long term
will look like
um or like Holland karnowski writing
about this being the most important
century and we're facing these sort of
unprecedented risks
um what's your take on this
well I don't think so
um first of all uh and although
nothing follows from this but but
perhaps it's worth noting
that pessimism throughout the centuries
and also conservatism in the in the bad
sense of the word of opposition to
progress
um has always included the idea that we
are facing
an unusual moment of crisis in which the
whole of everything we value is is at
stake
um and and it has always been false
um
uh and I I think it's it's false today I
I think the the talking about
existential risks
uh obviously you know there is a risk
that weapons we have available today
could bring down civilization though
it's a bit far-fetched uh but never mind
I mean they could cause so much
suffering that
trying to avoid that requires as much
effort and attention as avoiding the
destruction of civilization altogether
or our species I mean I I don't think I
make a make a distinction there but we
have those weapons and the ancient
Romans had enough weapons to do that
when they destroyed carcage
um and the the uh
Catholic church had the weapons to do
that when they exterminated the casars
and you know exterminations and and
destructions of civilizations have
happened since the dawn of civilization
weapons have been used
in unprecedented ways since the
invention of weapons
um
if anything I I think the um the amount
of knowledge that exists today
um and knowledge is not so easy to
destroy as that is explicit knowledge
the the knowledge in institutions is
relatively easy to destroy unfortunately
but uh the the explicit knowledge is is
so enormous today that it's a hardly
conceivable that that a civilization
brought to its knees could not rise
again
because they would just have to
implement the existing knowledge you
know they they would
they wouldn't have to reinvent
agriculture they wouldn't even have to
reinvent the tractor or fertilize it
they would just have to look in a book
and it would tell them what to do
so uh on the other hand so I think that
the danger
is not as it is painted it's it's
completely different
um uh and on the other hand the danger
from nature
uh is definitely less so we've just seen
in the last few weeks that uh a whole
range of possible destructions of
civilization from
um meteor strike
are not going to happen because
technology has advanced to the point
just just recently has advanced to the
point where that will not happen there's
a whole there's a whole still a whole
class of possible
impact from celestial objects that we do
not yet know how to uh how to counteract
but a large class of them and the most
probable ones we'd think
we don't know that for sure but we think
um are now no longer a danger so whereas
there was a danger of uh of a
uh
Continental destruction size
um impact every 250 000 years I think it
is
um that is now gone
so one chance of death every 250 000
years multiplied by 8 billion people
is quite a large risk per person per
year
so it's
uh
manifestly
existential risks are diminishing
well that's very nice to hear uh also as
you know that's a message I haven't
heard in a while
um yeah because I think a big part of
this this whole existential whole
project is that it's our experience that
it seems really hard generally for
people to Envision positive Futures
first these sort of dystopian Futures
are easy to see
um but you've argued you know that like
all problems are solvable
and even though problems are inevitable
and some are really really hard it
doesn't mean that they're unsolvable
um have you ever thought about
um any like specific visions of the
future that you think are desirable like
do you have a vision of existential hope
for the future
uh I'm I'm
because of popper I think I'm kind of
constitutionally opposed to utopianism
both both to utopianism as a philosophy
that is the idea that one should try to
design a perfect society and work
towards it and also utopianism in the
idea of uh just imagining what
Perfection would look like I I would
rather look for imperfections in what we
have
um which as I said earlier always
parochial even though they might lead to
something something Universal but the
actual uh flaw
is is always parochial and I I'd rather
look for those you know I I'm
I have to restrain myself from being the
guy who says something's wrong on the
internet you know something's wrong on
the internet so I have to fix it so I I
try not to do that so I I try to look
for things which which are going to be
interesting to fix rather than just
something someone said wrong
um so uh I think in general terms
I would like the future to be one of
ever more rapidly increasing knowledge
ever more rapidly decreasing suffering
but not just suffering in the Airy fairy
sense specific suffering that we see
like people dying of
um of plagues people people dying of
pandemics
um
Wars uh and so on that these things
require a lot of thought and
there's no law of physics that says we
can't solve them therefore we can't
solve them but it requires creativity
so I I envisage the future getting
better
in ways that of involving
conquering evils that we know about but
also getting better in ways that we
can't possibly know which will be you
know Wonderful
yeah I I think I recall also you
written about how creativity is like as
an extremely important tool in gaining
this knowledge that you think is like
what we need more of
um
is we've spoken about like this taking
children seriously is there anything
else
um that we should do on a sort of
societal level to like encourage more
creativity and that would enable more
knowledge
uh yes uh I mean at the moment we are
the western western culture
is suffering from uh a wave of fads
that whose General theme is to oppose
uh Western culture Western Civilization
to oppose the enlightenment as I said
earlier to to uh claim that it is a fake
or that it never happened or that it did
happen but was bad and all that kind of
thing uh
none of which is true not and all of it
is based on
factual misconceptions as well as
philosophical errors
but the phenomenon of
disinforming people's World Views
is
um
there are several such things which are
sweeping uh Western civilization and all
of them
have the effect of
um
inhibiting progress by
inhibiting Freedom so restricting the uh
the range of behaviors that are
tolerated for humans
uh restricting speech and communication
so that there are certain more and more
things are becoming uh taboo
um
enforced
what can I call them
um
reinterpretations of History which again
it's not really a reinterpretation of
History it's just a relabeling of the
phenomena of the Enlightenment in
pejorative terms
so uh so all those things are bad all
those things have got reactions against
them
um which I hope will eventually win or
or will be replaced by something even
better and so on
um in this context I should say that
just like I I have sometimes said and
people have criticized me for saying
that in science
cranks are valuable
um if if somebody and even even uh
scientific Publications
ought to give some space to cranks
because
it's not just that sometimes they are
right like J.S Mills said you know so
you sometimes they will be right but
even if they were never right
um as JS Mill also said
um
understand you cannot understand the
true theory without understanding why
the cranks are wrong
and not just one crank but lots of
cranks
and I think cranky
moral and political theories are in the
same category the danger is that unlike
in science the danger is that they get
into power
and and suppress
um progress towards true theories that's
different
um but
um
the cranks the the the the work or or
the the the the uh the extremists and so
on
um
are also a source of
creativity and sorry they're a they're a
source of problems to think about and to
apply creativity to
the danger with the danger is only that
they get into power
that their ideas spread is not in itself
dangerous
and our our society is good at not
letting dangerous people into power
not infallible so you know let
let's bear that in mind
yeah no thank you so much there's um
there are uh two more questions I want
to make sure I have time to ask
um which is one of them was
um on Twitter today if you got a
question
um about
um how the your you I think you
mentioned that the idea of the universal
code structure Constructor that um you
mentioned in the beginning of infinity
you said that it's flawed is that
something that you could maybe expand a
bit on
yes well I don't it's not a very
important point it's it's mostly a
matter of terminology
um in the in the beginning of infinity I
I said that I I classified humans as
universal Constructors by which I meant
that that there isn't any fundamental
limitation on what we can build or what
transformations of physics physical
objects we can perform if we want to
um other than the laws of physics they
are limitations but nothing else is
that's the point now the thing is uh
since then I have actually uh tried to
develop construct a theory in general
and in particular the theory of the
universal Constructor and it turns out
that that it
is really essential
in the theory of Constructors just like
in the theory of computers
to imagine objects that obey their
program
so a Constructor is
uh first and foremost
it obeys its program and then you can
ask
what are the range of possible programs
that it can be programmed
with and and what can it do as a result
a universal Constructor is one that can
be programmed to do anything that is
possible to do
is to perform
uh whatever transformation is physical
physically
um not not uh violated it doesn't
violate the laws of physics
um so therefore a universal Constructor
must be perfectly obedient
and a human
is almost by definition like I said at
the very beginning of this chat
um
cannot be obedient something which is
creative cannot be obedient
so
um the the that's a contradiction now
you can say that a human body
is an approximation to a Constructor
because
although the mind can't be programmed it
it has to consent or or at least
acquiesce or then it might fight against
what it's told to do and so on unlike a
Constructor
but the body is more or less a base the
mind
not not perfectly but
um well enough to count as an
approximate Universal Constructor
but uh there's also the fact that humans
are very slow at some things and
you know in whether it is possible we
don't know how to make a a real
Universal Constructor yet
um but supposing someone designed it
tomorrow it might be something like it
might be something like a a computer
with a robot
and
um
whether an individual person could build
that computer and that robot in a
lifetime out of ingredients that were
naturally occurring
I don't know it's doubtful
um so uh there are limitations on
humans as universal Constructors but as
I said that's that's really not very
important it's just a change in
terminology from what I used in the book
to a more convenient terminology
it doesn't mean that there's any
limitation in scope
of what humans can do
we we don't start with naturally
occurring things and if I want to build
something out of uh that builds it built
a if I want to build a physical machine
I will not begin with digging for iron
ore I will go to the hardware store or
to Amazon and buy the things which are
which are close close to what I want to
make and just assemble them
thank you yeah no I think it's still
interesting just to to hear you expand
on it
um the the second question that I really
want to make sure I get to ask you is
that like one of the things that we try
to do with this podcast is to like
really try to inspire more
um positive visions of the future and so
um we always ask like for um an example
of a you catastrophic so basically the
opposite of a catastrophe so an event
where the expected value of the world is
much higher after the event
um and so
I was just wondering could you maybe
share
um if you have a vishna what could be
such a new catastrophe maybe it's the
creation of the universal Constructor or
something like that yes I was about to
Guess that one
um I think
um
uh I think it will be important it
uh it will mean that after the
Universal Constructor is built after the
first one is built and after all it can
build then more
uh exponentially more uh the human
role in production will no longer ever
involve toil
that is unpleasant physical work
toil will be completely ended by the
invention of the universal Constructor
although you know
civilization in general has already
reduced toil by something like 99
compared with
what it was uh you know when the human
species first evolved so this is nothing
new but I think it will be fairly
dramatic by by the standards of everyday
events
um and the role instead of being to
provide toil the role of humans will be
entirely to provide knowledge
either for its own sake or to program
the universal Constructor
and there will be
increasingly
sophisticated aids to programming the
universal Constructor just like chat GPT
can
take a lot of the toil
out of writing a program
uh I mean all it really does is I
understand it
um someone was explaining this to me uh
is it um
it takes the Corpus of all programs that
have been uploaded to the internet
and and constructs uh the one you've
asked for
um in the same way that it constructs
good English sentences
um by the way I
I was surprised
at how good
chat GPT is constructing uh sentences in
proper English
I I would have guessed that it will be
decades before AI can do this
AGI of course
could do it relatively easily but I'm
not sure that that's on the horizon
I hope it is but as I said as I have
said
the people working on this have have got
the idea that an AGI is is kind of just
one more heave and and our AI will
become an AGI and I think that's the
opposite the opposite is the case it's
the the AIS are getting further and
further away from an AGI notwithstanding
their excellent English
yeah I saw in your blog you had a bit of
a an argument almost with chat TPT
um about writing a poem
um but yeah it got it right in the end I
think it did it does it often gets it
right in the end uh precisely when you
have inserted in your in your angry
objections all the knowledge that it
needs to get it right
yeah well it was uh it was a fun read
and I can recommend it
um one the last question I want to ask
then you mentioned proper a lot
throughout this conversation and if one
hasn't read anything by proper like
where should one start
I I I'm often asked this and I don't
know it really depends on where you're
coming from Papa was so Broad
in in his subject matter you know
political philosophy and philosophy of
science and philosophy of knowledge and
um that uh and within those he he
addressed problems in different ways I I
I think
I think the the concept that
maybe unifies all of
um
Papa's thinking in all these subjects as
uh Manchester United leonardis uh
recently uh
pointed out to me is the concept of a
problem
um
a problem in science a problem in
philosophy a problem in politics the
idea that and this is also seeing one of
my chats with chat GPT was about because
it didn't know at first and so I
reminded it that according to Papa the
growth of knowledge begins always begins
with a problem
and I asked it what what does the
growth of knowledge according to Papa
always begin with
and it said a theory a criticism you
know and I said no it's a problem now
start again you know and and finally it
did it did give a quite a nice version
of what Popper's take on this
um so
however to answer your question
if somebody wants to approach popper if
they've been persuaded by this this chat
here to start with Papa to start on Papa
uh I would say think about what problems
you you would like to have illuminated
by a much much better theory of
knowledge than you have
probably
um and that will guide you
to which of Papa's books or articles or
videos or uh
will uh
will yeah it will best make sense to you
at first then later you can see the
connections with other things
so I I think I recently wrote on Twitter
that that
uh
sorry what
are we still are we still running
oh I don't know continue
uh okay so there's
um a lecture by proper called something
like um on the sources of uh knowledge
and ignorance I'm afraid I can't
remember the name but I I uh
every every so often I go back to read
that
um lecture it's it's not very long
um
and and get something new out of it
every time I think it's the best
discourse on
epistemology ever written
um it it it's incredibly deep and yet
incredibly clear
and uh Brett Hall the thing that
prompted me to this is that Brett Hall
uh had a series of five videos
explaining this this lecture by popular
and uh and he ended up saying I'm not
sure anyone will want to spend five
hours uh listening to my video and I I
said
um it's worse it's worth it but you can
also read the original which isn't
nowhere near that long
well that's a great recommendation to to
go out on and I think we can link the
um the the talk in the in the podcast
when we post it
um
but yeah I think I just want to like
sort of echo what what Allison has
already said that you know we're great
um great admirers of yet foresight and
we're very
um yeah very very happy that you came on
this podcast and I am looking forward to
see what uh our AI generator image
generator will make out of your uh
prompt for the universal Constructor
oh but yeah thank you so much everyone
for coming and thank you David
thanks for having me